---
title: "Web Servers Executing Suspicious Processes"
excerpt: "System Information Discovery"
categories:
  - Application
last_modified_at: 2019-04-01
toc: true
toc_label: ""
tags:
  - System Information Discovery
  - Discovery
  - Splunk Enterprise
  - Splunk Enterprise Security
  - Splunk Cloud
  - Endpoint
redirect_from: application/web_servers_executing_suspicious_processes/
---

### :warning: THIS IS A EXPERIMENTAL DETECTION
This detection has been marked experimental by the Splunk Threat Research team. This means we have not been able to test, simulate, or build datasets for this detection. Use at your own risk. This analytic is **NOT** supported.


[Try in Splunk Security Cloud](https://www.splunk.com/en_us/cyber-security.html){: .btn .btn--success}

#### Description

The following analytic detects suspicious processes on systems labeled as web servers. This detection is made by a Splunk query that searches for specific process names that might indicate malicious activity. These suspicious processes include &#34;whoami&#34;, &#34;ping&#34;, &#34;iptables&#34;, &#34;wget&#34;, &#34;service&#34;, and &#34;curl&#34;. Uses the Splunk data model &#34;Endpoint.Processes&#34; and filters the results to only include systems categorized as web servers. This detection is important because it indicates unauthorized or malicious activity on web servers since these processes are commonly used by attackers to perform reconnaissance, establish persistence, or exfiltrate data from compromised systems. The impact of such an attack can be significant, ranging from data theft to the deployment of additional malicious payloads, potentially leading to ransomware or other damaging outcomes. False positives might occur since the legitimate use of these processes on web servers can trigger the analytic. Next steps include triaging and investigating to determine the legitimacy of the activity. Also, review the source and command of the suspicious process. You must also examine any relevant on-disk artifacts and look for concurrent processes to identify the source of the attack.

- **Type**: [TTP](https://github.com/splunk/security_content/wiki/Detection-Analytic-Types)
- **Product**: Splunk Enterprise, Splunk Enterprise Security, Splunk Cloud
- **Datamodel**: [Endpoint](https://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/CIM/latest/User/Endpoint)
- **Last Updated**: 2019-04-01
- **Author**: David Dorsey, Splunk
- **ID**: ec3b7601-689a-4463-94e0-c9f45638efb9

### Annotations
<details>
  <summary>ATT&CK</summary>

<div markdown="1">

#### [ATT&CK](https://attack.mitre.org/)

| ID          | Technique   | Tactic         |
| ----------- | ----------- |--------------- |
| [T1082](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1082/) | System Information Discovery | Discovery |

</div>
</details>


<details>
  <summary>Kill Chain Phase</summary>

<div markdown="1">

* Exploitation


</div>
</details>


<details>
  <summary>NIST</summary>

<div markdown="1">

* DE.CM



</div>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>CIS20</summary>

<div markdown="1">

* CIS 10



</div>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>CVE</summary>

<div markdown="1">


</div>
</details>


#### Search

```

| tstats `security_content_summariesonly` count min(_time) as firstTime max(_time) as lastTime from datamodel=Endpoint.Processes where Processes.dest_category="web_server" AND (Processes.process="*whoami*" OR Processes.process="*ping*" OR Processes.process="*iptables*" OR Processes.process="*wget*" OR Processes.process="*service*" OR Processes.process="*curl*") by Processes.process Processes.process_name, Processes.dest Processes.user
| `drop_dm_object_name(Processes)` 
| `security_content_ctime(firstTime)` 
| `security_content_ctime(lastTime)` 
| `web_servers_executing_suspicious_processes_filter`
```

#### Macros
The SPL above uses the following Macros:
* [security_content_summariesonly](https://github.com/splunk/security_content/blob/develop/macros/security_content_summariesonly.yml)
* [security_content_ctime](https://github.com/splunk/security_content/blob/develop/macros/security_content_ctime.yml)

> :information_source:
> **web_servers_executing_suspicious_processes_filter** is a empty macro by default. It allows the user to filter out any results (false positives) without editing the SPL.



#### Required fields
List of fields required to use this analytic.
* _time
* Processes.dest_category
* Processes.process
* Processes.process_name
* Processes.dest
* Processes.user



#### How To Implement
The detection is based on data that originates from Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) agents. These agents are designed to provide security-related telemetry from the endpoints where the agent is installed. To implement this search, you must ingest logs that contain the process GUID, process name, and parent process. Additionally, you must ingest complete command-line executions. These logs must be processed using the appropriate Splunk Technology Add-ons that are specific to the EDR product. The logs must also be mapped to the `Processes` node of the `Endpoint` data model. Use the Splunk Common Information Model (CIM) to normalize the field names and speed up the data modeling process.
#### Known False Positives
Some of these processes may be used legitimately on web servers during maintenance or other administrative tasks.

#### Associated Analytic Story
* [Apache Struts Vulnerability](/stories/apache_struts_vulnerability)




#### RBA

| Risk Score  | Impact      | Confidence   | Message      |
| ----------- | ----------- |--------------|--------------|
| 25.0 | 50 | 50 | tbd |


> :information_source:
> The Risk Score is calculated by the following formula: Risk Score = (Impact * Confidence/100). Initial Confidence and Impact is set by the analytic author.


#### Reference


#### Test Dataset
Replay any dataset to Splunk Enterprise by using our [`replay.py`](https://github.com/splunk/attack_data#using-replaypy) tool or the [UI](https://github.com/splunk/attack_data#using-ui).
Alternatively you can replay a dataset into a [Splunk Attack Range](https://github.com/splunk/attack_range#replay-dumps-into-attack-range-splunk-server)




[*source*](https://github.com/splunk/security_content/tree/develop/detections/application/web_servers_executing_suspicious_processes.yml) \| *version*: **1**