---
title: "Amazon EKS Kubernetes Pod scan detection"
excerpt: "Cloud Service Discovery"
categories:
  - Cloud
last_modified_at: 2020-04-15
toc: true
toc_label: ""
tags:
  - Cloud Service Discovery
  - Discovery
  - Splunk Enterprise
  - Splunk Enterprise Security
  - Splunk Cloud
redirect_from: cloud/amazon_eks_kubernetes_pod_scan_detection/
---

### :warning: THIS IS A EXPERIMENTAL DETECTION
This detection has been marked experimental by the Splunk Threat Research team. This means we have not been able to test, simulate, or build datasets for this detection. Use at your own risk. This analytic is **NOT** supported.


[Try in Splunk Security Cloud](https://www.splunk.com/en_us/cyber-security.html){: .btn .btn--success}

#### Description

The following analytic detects unauthenticated requests made against the Kubernetes&#39; Pods API through proactive monitoring to protect the Kubernetes environment from unauthorized access and potential security breaches. The detection is made by using the Splunk query `aws_cloudwatchlogs_eks` with specific filters to identify these requests. Identifies events where the `user.username` is set to &#34;system:anonymous&#34;, the `verb` is set to &#34;list&#34;, and the `objectRef.resource` is set to &#34;pods&#34;. Additionally, the search checks if the `requestURI` is equal to &#34;/api/v1/pods&#34;. Analyzing these events helps you to identify any unauthorized access attempts to the Kubernetes&#39; Pods API. Unauthenticated requests can indicate potential security breaches or unauthorized access to sensitive resources within the Kubernetes environment. The detection is important because unauthorized access to Kubernetes&#39; Pods API can lead to the compromise of sensitive data, unauthorized execution of commands, or even the potential for lateral movement within the Kubernetes cluster. False positives might occur since there might be legitimate use cases for unauthenticated requests in certain scenarios. Therefore, you must review and validate any detected events before taking any action.  Next steps include investigating the incident to mitigate any ongoing threats, and strengthening the security measures to prevent future unauthorized access attempts.

- **Type**: [Hunting](https://github.com/splunk/security_content/wiki/Detection-Analytic-Types)
- **Product**: Splunk Enterprise, Splunk Enterprise Security, Splunk Cloud

- **Last Updated**: 2020-04-15
- **Author**: Rod Soto, Splunk
- **ID**: dbfca1dd-b8e5-4ba4-be0e-e565e5d62002

### Annotations
<details>
  <summary>ATT&CK</summary>

<div markdown="1">

#### [ATT&CK](https://attack.mitre.org/)

| ID          | Technique   | Tactic         |
| ----------- | ----------- |--------------- |
| [T1526](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1526/) | Cloud Service Discovery | Discovery |

</div>
</details>


<details>
  <summary>Kill Chain Phase</summary>

<div markdown="1">

* Exploitation


</div>
</details>


<details>
  <summary>NIST</summary>

<div markdown="1">

* DE.AE



</div>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>CIS20</summary>

<div markdown="1">

* CIS 10



</div>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>CVE</summary>

<div markdown="1">


</div>
</details>


#### Search

```
`aws_cloudwatchlogs_eks` "user.username"="system:anonymous" verb=list objectRef.resource=pods requestURI="/api/v1/pods" 
| rename source as cluster_name sourceIPs{} as src_ip 
| stats count min(_time) as firstTime max(_time) as lastTime values(responseStatus.reason) values(responseStatus.code) values(userAgent) values(verb) values(requestURI) by src_ip cluster_name user.username user.groups{} 
| `security_content_ctime(lastTime)` 
| `security_content_ctime(firstTime)` 
| `amazon_eks_kubernetes_pod_scan_detection_filter` 
```

#### Macros
The SPL above uses the following Macros:
* [security_content_ctime](https://github.com/splunk/security_content/blob/develop/macros/security_content_ctime.yml)
* [aws_cloudwatchlogs_eks](https://github.com/splunk/security_content/blob/develop/macros/aws_cloudwatchlogs_eks.yml)

> :information_source:
> **amazon_eks_kubernetes_pod_scan_detection_filter** is a empty macro by default. It allows the user to filter out any results (false positives) without editing the SPL.



#### Required fields
List of fields required to use this analytic.
* _time
* user.username
* verb
* objectRef.resource
* requestURI
* source
* sourceIPs{}
* responseStatus.reason
* responseStatus.code
* userAgent
* src_ip
* user.groups{}



#### How To Implement
You must install the AWS App for Splunk (version 5.1.0 or later) and Splunk Add-on forAWS (version 4.4.0 or later), then configure your AWS CloudWatch EKS Logs.Please also customize the `kubernetes_pods_aws_scan_fingerprint_detection` macro to filter out the false positives.
#### Known False Positives
Not all unauthenticated requests are malicious, but frequency, UA and source IPs and direct request to API provide context.

#### Associated Analytic Story
* [Kubernetes Scanning Activity](/stories/kubernetes_scanning_activity)




#### RBA

| Risk Score  | Impact      | Confidence   | Message      |
| ----------- | ----------- |--------------|--------------|
| 25.0 | 50 | 50 | tbd |


> :information_source:
> The Risk Score is calculated by the following formula: Risk Score = (Impact * Confidence/100). Initial Confidence and Impact is set by the analytic author.


#### Reference


#### Test Dataset
Replay any dataset to Splunk Enterprise by using our [`replay.py`](https://github.com/splunk/attack_data#using-replaypy) tool or the [UI](https://github.com/splunk/attack_data#using-ui).
Alternatively you can replay a dataset into a [Splunk Attack Range](https://github.com/splunk/attack_range#replay-dumps-into-attack-range-splunk-server)




[*source*](https://github.com/splunk/security_content/tree/develop/detections/experimental/cloud/amazon_eks_kubernetes_pod_scan_detection.yml) \| *version*: **1**