---
title: "Create or delete windows shares using net exe"
excerpt: "Indicator Removal, Network Share Connection Removal"
categories:
  - Endpoint
last_modified_at: 2023-07-13
toc: true
toc_label: ""
tags:
  - Indicator Removal
  - Defense Evasion
  - Network Share Connection Removal
  - Defense Evasion
  - Splunk Enterprise
  - Splunk Enterprise Security
  - Splunk Cloud
  - Endpoint
redirect_from: endpoint/create_or_delete_windows_shares_using_net_exe/
---



[Try in Splunk Security Cloud](https://www.splunk.com/en_us/cyber-security.html){: .btn .btn--success}

#### Description

The following analytic detects the creation or deletion of hidden shares using the net.exe command. It searches for processes that involve the use of net.exe and filters for actions related to creating or deleting shares. This behavior is worth identifying for a Security Operations Center (SOC) because the creation or deletion of hidden shares can be indicative of malicious activity. Attackers may use hidden shares to exfiltrate data, distribute malware, or establish persistence within a network. By detecting and investigating these actions, the SOC can identify and mitigate potential threats before they cause significant damage. If a true positive is found, it suggests that an attacker is attempting to manipulate or exploit the network by creating or deleting hidden shares. The impact of such an attack can vary, but it often involves unauthorized access to sensitive information, disruption of services, or the introduction of malware. To implement this analytic, ensure that you are collecting and ingesting endpoint process logs that include information about the net.exe command. It is important to note that there may be false positives, as legitimate actions may also involve the use of net.exe. Therefore, thorough triage and investigation are necessary to determine the intent and nature of the detected activity. During the triage process, analysts should review the details of the process involving the net.exe command, including the user, parent process, and timestamps. Additionally, it is important to capture and inspect any relevant on-disk artifacts and look for concurrent processes to identify the source of the attack. By employing this analytic, SOC analysts can detect potential threats earlier, allowing for prompt response and mitigation. This proactive approach helps to enhance the overall security posture of the organization and protect against potential data breaches, malware infections, and other damaging outcomes.

- **Type**: [TTP](https://github.com/splunk/security_content/wiki/Detection-Analytic-Types)
- **Product**: Splunk Enterprise, Splunk Enterprise Security, Splunk Cloud
- **Datamodel**: [Endpoint](https://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/CIM/latest/User/Endpoint)
- **Last Updated**: 2023-07-13
- **Author**: Bhavin Patel, Splunk
- **ID**: 743a322c-9a68-4a0f-9c17-85d9cce2a27c

### Annotations
<details>
  <summary>ATT&CK</summary>

<div markdown="1">

#### [ATT&CK](https://attack.mitre.org/)

| ID          | Technique   | Tactic         |
| ----------- | ----------- |--------------- |
| [T1070](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1070/) | Indicator Removal | Defense Evasion |

| [T1070.005](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1070/005/) | Network Share Connection Removal | Defense Evasion |

</div>
</details>


<details>
  <summary>Kill Chain Phase</summary>

<div markdown="1">

* Exploitation


</div>
</details>


<details>
  <summary>NIST</summary>

<div markdown="1">

* DE.CM



</div>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>CIS20</summary>

<div markdown="1">

* CIS 10



</div>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>CVE</summary>

<div markdown="1">


</div>
</details>


#### Search

```

| tstats `security_content_summariesonly` count values(Processes.user) as user values(Processes.parent_process) as parent_process min(_time) as firstTime max(_time) as lastTime from datamodel=Endpoint.Processes where `process_net` by Processes.process Processes.process_name Processes.original_file_name Processes.dest 
| `drop_dm_object_name(Processes)` 
| `security_content_ctime(firstTime)`
| `security_content_ctime(lastTime)` 
| search process=*share* 
| `create_or_delete_windows_shares_using_net_exe_filter` 
```

#### Macros
The SPL above uses the following Macros:
* [security_content_ctime](https://github.com/splunk/security_content/blob/develop/macros/security_content_ctime.yml)
* [security_content_summariesonly](https://github.com/splunk/security_content/blob/develop/macros/security_content_summariesonly.yml)
* [process_net](https://github.com/splunk/security_content/blob/develop/macros/process_net.yml)

> :information_source:
> **create_or_delete_windows_shares_using_net_exe_filter** is a empty macro by default. It allows the user to filter out any results (false positives) without editing the SPL.



#### Required fields
List of fields required to use this analytic.
* _time
* Processes.dest
* Processes.user
* Processes.parent_process_name
* Processes.parent_process
* Processes.original_file_name
* Processes.process_name
* Processes.process
* Processes.process_id
* Processes.parent_process_path
* Processes.process_path
* Processes.parent_process_id



#### How To Implement
The detection is based on data that originates from Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) agents. These agents are designed to provide security-related telemetry from the endpoints where the agent is installed. To implement this search, you must ingest logs that contain the process GUID, process name, and parent process. Additionally, you must ingest complete command-line executions. These logs must be processed using the appropriate Splunk Technology Add-ons that are specific to the EDR product. The logs must also be mapped to the `Processes` node of the `Endpoint` data model. Use the Splunk Common Information Model (CIM) to normalize the field names and speed up the data modeling process.
#### Known False Positives
Administrators often leverage net.exe to create or delete network shares. You should verify that the activity was intentional and is legitimate.

#### Associated Analytic Story
* [Hidden Cobra Malware](/stories/hidden_cobra_malware)
* [CISA AA22-277A](/stories/cisa_aa22-277a)
* [Windows Post-Exploitation](/stories/windows_post-exploitation)
* [Prestige Ransomware](/stories/prestige_ransomware)




#### RBA

| Risk Score  | Impact      | Confidence   | Message      |
| ----------- | ----------- |--------------|--------------|
| 25.0 | 50 | 50 | An instance of $parent_process_name$ spawning $process_name$ was identified on endpoint $dest$ by user $user$ enumerating Windows file shares. |


> :information_source:
> The Risk Score is calculated by the following formula: Risk Score = (Impact * Confidence/100). Initial Confidence and Impact is set by the analytic author.


#### Reference

* [https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1070/005/](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1070/005/)



#### Test Dataset
Replay any dataset to Splunk Enterprise by using our [`replay.py`](https://github.com/splunk/attack_data#using-replaypy) tool or the [UI](https://github.com/splunk/attack_data#using-ui).
Alternatively you can replay a dataset into a [Splunk Attack Range](https://github.com/splunk/attack_range#replay-dumps-into-attack-range-splunk-server)




[*source*](https://github.com/splunk/security_content/tree/develop/detections/endpoint/create_or_delete_windows_shares_using_net_exe.yml) \| *version*: **7**